# ECES 450-650 Final Project
Ashley Bishop, Philip Huddy, Bethany Pittman, Emil Snyman, and Zoe Sucato

The goal of this project was to embed proteins using the SeqVec, Bert-Base (using TAPE), and ESM models, and to then analyze how well these embedded proteins cluster using an agglomerative hierarchical clustering method and the DBSCAN clustering method.  Protein embedding is the process of describing a sequence based on its position and orientation (Alford, 2013). Machine learning models generally require vector inputs, so embedding proteins allows for simplification in modeling (Heinzinger). Clusters are the subsets of a dataset that are homogenous and well separated from the rest of the dataset (“Protein Clusters Help.”). Clusters group proteins that have similar structures and therefore most likely have similar functions. These processes are relevant to the industry because it is important to analyze the potential benefits of embedding proteins before clustering, and to analyze how different embedding and clustering methods can give different metric values for different use cases. Comparing the results of the different clustering methods can give insight as to when each clustering method is beneficial, which can have a positive influence on future applications of these models. The results of this project covered by this paper were obtained by leveraging open source code and available python modules to run the models on a provided experimental dataset. Embedding the data with the ESM model and clustering with the AgglomerativeClustering hierarchical method outperformed all other tested combinations.

